Tasfia Sultana: Hello.
Hyunjin Seo: hi I am.
Tasfia Sultana: yeah and the student volunteer.
Tasfia Sultana: On the speakers right.
Tasfia Sultana: Yes, oh, will you be the one who is sharing your screen i'm i'm supposed to give the one who's going to share the screen co host abilities.
Hyunjin Seo: No, I don't think so I was never told about that and.
Tasfia Sultana: The heck right just making sure.
Well Hello.
Tasfia Sultana: Hello.
Tasfia Sultana: Are you hi i'm the student volunteer i'm you're one of the speakers right.
Quincy Brown: Yes, yes.
Tasfia Sultana: Oh, will you be sharing your screen today.
Quincy Brown: I won't i'm hoping someone will, because there are slides but I won't be me i'm not the one.
Tasfia Sultana: Okay, so I think it's the other person.
Tasfia Sultana: No.
Quincy Brown: No problem, I do have a question because i'm doing a session, right after this where I will be what what did this, what do you need to do in order to share this to share slides.
Tasfia Sultana: i'm the student volunteer will give you a Co host abilities, so you can go to the bottom.
Tasfia Sultana: portion and Reza share screen and then you can choose the the window that you have open for the slides.
Quincy Brown: Okay perfect perfect perfect.
Quincy Brown: yeah okay perfect can I test something now would that be okay.
Oh.
Tasfia Sultana: I think you can maybe.
Quincy Brown: If I share a screen.
Tasfia Sultana: Are you able to right now.
Quincy Brown: I am.
Tasfia Sultana: Okay, you can test it.
Quincy Brown: i'm just curious like.
Quincy Brown: To do you see you see all of this i'm not familiar enough with Google slides.
Tasfia Sultana: yeah I can see all of it.
Quincy Brown: But I don't want you to see all of it, I want to see just the slides like the slideshow part of it, you know what I mean but that's all right.
Tasfia Sultana: Definitely I just opened the Google slides on Google chrome and i'm present to the present mode and just share my like chrome window.
Quincy Brown: Okay, let me see if I try that Okay, let me see if I turned it try that.
Quincy Brown: This.
Quincy Brown: Do you still see all of the thing too so like as though i'm not in present mode.
Tasfia Sultana: yeah I can see our top path.
Quincy Brown: You can see, like all my other tabs and stuff.
Tasfia Sultana: yeah.
Quincy Brown: How am I going to present.
Tasfia Sultana: What if you do that full screen thing right next to the settings.
Quincy Brown: Okay hold on So if I go here and do present presenter present.
Quincy Brown: So.
Tasfia Sultana: Now you only see the slides.
Quincy Brown: Okay, and that looks like regular and all of that.
Quincy Brown: Correct yeah.
Quincy Brown: yeah Okay, so let me just try one more thing, because I have like my notes in the slides, and so I wanted to be sure that I have two screens, so I can present in one and have my notes in the other, so this is, I appreciate you helping me, even though this is not technical.
Quincy Brown: So okay.
Quincy Brown: So, then, I can just present and do all of that, and then kind of move through.
Quincy Brown: here.
Quincy Brown: yeah.
Quincy Brown: And all that looks fine.
Okay.
Quincy Brown: Okay awesome.
Quincy Brown: Thank you so much, I appreciate.
on mobile.
And then.
Quincy Brown: yeah Okay, and one last question, and when you get to the inhibits has joined the Umar joined via zoom doesn't matter which one we pick or do we need to join do is zoom.
Tasfia Sultana: Oh, I think all the meetings are going to zoom.
Quincy Brown: Okay, so we shouldn't choose go join through uber.
Tasfia Sultana: i'm not really 100% sure.
Quincy Brown: All right, just asking around all right Thank you so much.
Loretta Ovueraye: Well, good afternoon everybody.
Good.
afternoon.
Jakerra Lance: So.
Loretta Ovueraye: That was a quick switcheroo from the main session and surprised that there were folks already here.
Loretta Ovueraye: So I see our panelists are already here.
Loretta Ovueraye: gates here.
Elodie Billionniere: Dr gates to be here actually i'm coming on to somebody else name she's even just doing.
Loretta Ovueraye: she's right here, for her okay all right, well, I will share my screen.
Elodie Billionniere: Is everybody here do you need help, everything is good.
Loretta Ovueraye: um I think we should be good, I have the screen already sharing.
Loretta Ovueraye: I want to make sure that the right thing is showing.
Elodie Billionniere: So we do see use we see your slide deck.
Elodie Billionniere: You may want to go into the presenter view and then that would be up it now.
Loretta Ovueraye: Because i'm in the wrong okay.
Loretta Ovueraye: All right.
Loretta Ovueraye: Okay, so not to waste any more time.
Loretta Ovueraye: I don't see it is.
Loretta Ovueraye: And we have all of our speakers.
To.
Loretta Ovueraye: All right, so good afternoon everyone Thank you so much for being a part of this panel.
Loretta Ovueraye: We will use the chat box for questions and, at the end of course you can pick up your microphone and speak at that time, so we have our panelists with us, but before we start, I just wanted to give you some overview as to why this conversation is important.
let's see.
Loretta Ovueraye: So there is an elaborate series of biases that often are on intended that begin actually a preschool and go all through the education system right, and this is a statement by for client, one of the researchers in women's studies.
Loretta Ovueraye: In technology, we know that most of the technology workforce in the United States it's 90% white or Asian and 75% male but that's a significant.
Loretta Ovueraye: Number when you think about how many women are working out there in industry and how much more opportunity there is for the female in the workforce.
Loretta Ovueraye: Disparities exists, well, if you look at this chart thing that that speaks to itself right.
Loretta Ovueraye: When you think about the individuals who are completing a computer science degree compared to our male counterparts and what's happening and the attainment of a bachelor's degree, women are only 18%.
Loretta Ovueraye: Achieving bachelor's degrees and for those of you who have been looking for jobs in that space, you know that that's one of the minimal skills that's needed the other pieces of course industry credentials.
Loretta Ovueraye: So there, there are opportunities for women in this space.
Loretta Ovueraye: When you also talk about disparities in participation and advancement in the workforce there's also a dearth of.
Loretta Ovueraye: color, if you will, in that space, so, if you look at the numbers two times lower for our black sisters and brothers and the Latino population again opportunities for equity in this space.
Loretta Ovueraye: This is just a huge chart.
Loretta Ovueraye: And when you have time later on to go back and look at the woohoo APP to look at this PowerPoint you can see that companies are hiring.
Loretta Ovueraye: And this is the variety of individuals of population mix in those companies, and you have it right to.
Loretta Ovueraye: You to make make your judgment calls, but what really stands out if you look at this is the green right the Green is very small.
Loretta Ovueraye: There is, depending on the company that you're looking for Amazon has made great strides in ensuring that there is a mix, but when we talk about mix we can't forget that mixes of.
Loretta Ovueraye: The variety of of individuals in an environment is impacted by people that you're serving so we do want companies to mirror the population they're serving so if it makes sense for a company because of where they're located.
Loretta Ovueraye: we're not here to judge we're just here to see how can we pull our sisters up and help them to make the difference.
Loretta Ovueraye: So why are we addressing under representation and technology, it is an urgent priority, because if you look at the data right now and see that there is a lack of diversity in the tech sector and, if you remember the conversation we just had not too long ago, there is a.
Loretta Ovueraye: The future is tech right, and if the future is tech on our females or women who are working, who need to come out of poverty.
Loretta Ovueraye: They if we don't pull our sisters up what will happen is that female population will have lots of homes that are challenged.
Loretta Ovueraye: And if you look at the data, the data also tells you that have a home where the female has got.
Loretta Ovueraye: A good skills and it's working and it's valuable to bring in a decent living wage into the household that it makes a difference for their family and move them out of generational poverty.
Loretta Ovueraye: So they're really true deep hot benefits for our economy to have representation from these groups and make a difference for all.
Loretta Ovueraye: As I just said, the future of workforces tech automation need for upscaling and for me scaling so.
Loretta Ovueraye: Now it's time for us to get into the conversation, so I will start with my introduction, my name is loretta hope right.
Loretta Ovueraye: I serve Miami dade College as the vice provost for workforce programs and professional development and that's my bio out there on the screen.
Loretta Ovueraye: And we are we have in our presence, just an amazing group of individuals who are going to speak to to get their feedback we have some prepared questions so we'll start from the questions and conversation and then go on into an open Q amp a.
Loretta Ovueraye: alright.
Loretta Ovueraye: So, on my on my end I see you on the on the bottom corner, Dr quincy brown you, please, do the brief intro.
Quincy Brown: Sure, I.
Quincy Brown: started quincy brown so busy trying to find me in your in your squares.
Quincy Brown: have been part of this computing computer science competing education.
Quincy Brown: Community for a while now i'm a computer scientist by training has been a computer science Professor i've also worked in the government policy space and in the nonprofit space and.
Quincy Brown: yeah, I guess, everyone can read the particular.
Loretta Ovueraye: Thank you, Dr Brown.
Loretta Ovueraye: Dr gates.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Sure, so my name is Anne keto skates and I am senior vice provost for faculty affairs at the University of Texas at El paso I just started that position in August of 2020 and prior to that I served.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: For many years as a chair computer science and also the associate VP for the office of research and sponsored projects, I also lead.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: The computing lions of Hispanic serving institutions was really great to hear today's conversation about includes and to learn that includes is actually sponsoring this event.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: we're one of eight national includes alliances that's focus on recruitment retention investment is of Hispanics and computing.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: were the only one focus primarily on computing and on Hispanics and so we're working with over 60 institutions of higher ED and partners across the country.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: really looking to accelerate the rate at which Hispanics earn credentials by 2030 We hope that 20% of those that are in Quebec credentials will be Hispanics.
Loretta Ovueraye: And in right.
Loretta Ovueraye: After when so.
Yes.
Hyunjin Seo: Hello i'm here in gen xer associate professor of digital media at university of Kansas i'm also founding director of the Center for digital inclusion at K you.
Hyunjin Seo: Through my role I have taught technology courses and undergraduate graduate levels and our university, but it also offers technology, education for marginalized populations, including low income.
Hyunjin Seo: Minority older others and also women recently released from jail or prison, thank you.
Loretta Ovueraye: Thank you so much for that intro so as you see, we are surrounded by really, really amazing ladies who are going to share with us a little bit more about their insights on what they've done.
Loretta Ovueraye: So we have our first question, which is what are the limitations of current computing curriculum to facilitate equitable pathways for diverse learners to transition into computing or technology.
Loretta Ovueraye: Anyone can get us going on that property.
Quincy Brown: So i'll start i'll share that I think some of the limitations of the.
Quincy Brown: Curricula are also in also involve.
Quincy Brown: You know who's creating the curriculum right, and so we have most computer science faculty have you know gone through that the academic route and then become faculty and then there they go, you know rise up the Faculty breaks, and so I think that you know understanding.
Quincy Brown: equity in when it comes to pathways and creating these pathways requires and understanding of all of the places where people come in all of the reasons why they you know they seek this.
Quincy Brown: You know, to have these skills and I don't I don't know that enough.
Quincy Brown: People who are, on the other side of this who are providing the learning have an understanding that that those who are designing the programs, and all that really have an understanding of that because it's just not been their experience right.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: yeah and I can jump in I agree totally with you what you're saying quincy and that's one of the things that the computing alliance or COs he's really focus on we're working together.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Trying to learn from each other we're mainly Hispanics are in institutions, which means that we serve anywhere from 25% to almost 100% because we work with Puerto Rico Midwest you tip is that 80%.
Quincy Brown: Hispanic.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: But one of the things that we really have done to.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: to upgrade curriculum if you well, is that we develop really strong partnerships with with industry and i'll just highlight a few things, one of the things that.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Google approached us about was saying that many of the students coming from minority serving institutions so.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: don't do well on the interview side when they are applying to Google, so what we started was a program working with Google over about.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Six months with a software engineer and others at Google, as well as faculty from across the alliance, creating a problem solving course.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: It was a one credit, there are three versions of that two or one credit one is to credit one is general problem solving the other ones around computational thinking and that there was around algorithmic thinking.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: And from that we created a community of practice we're getting adoption around the country it's really competency based, so the students are working toward pro coming up with a an approach on how to solve problems out of that students have created.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: coding clubs and so there's been a really big uptake on how well the students now are interviewing we have a Google.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: tech exchange program where students actually spend a semester at Google right now it's all virtual we're working with Howard other hbc us and then kasi institutions but we've also been working with Lockheed Martin Microsoft Oracle on on bringing in.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Providing more experiences around cyber security and Ai I will say that one of the really important things when we start looking at diversity is having a diversified work for us that really understands biases and Ai in in data.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: And so I think that those are the big changes and i've seen.
Hyunjin Seo: Leslie I want I want I really agree with what the speakers said, and was excited to hear different initiatives that are taking place.
Hyunjin Seo: In terms of limitations, I think.
Hyunjin Seo: First of all, I want to make it clear that I speak from primarily from my experience of teaching digital media courses at a university and also offering technology, education for marginalized populations in particular marginalized women in informal settings.
Hyunjin Seo: And I think one of them in limitations is.
Hyunjin Seo: You know, stimulating projects involving real world businesses organizations, they can be attractive to a broader group of learners tend to come later in the curriculum, for example as capstone project, it is important to introduce you know such projects only in the curriculum.
Hyunjin Seo: And also.
Hyunjin Seo: You know this emphasis on experiential learning and Problem Solving approach can help reduce the potential of alienating those who have.
Hyunjin Seo: Lower computing self efficacy another limitation, I want to mention is not being able to better understand accommodative are learning styles and interest, especially among underrepresented loners.
Hyunjin Seo: Of course, when you have a big lecture class, it is challenging to accommodate different learning needs, however.
Hyunjin Seo: You know, often we see there's more it was more classes often like Taylor approaches responding to different levels of.
Hyunjin Seo: computing self efficacy and their career goals so recently, you and I have you know, as I have layered multiple multi disciplinary projects, offering.
Hyunjin Seo: Technology education for marginalized populations in informal learning settings our.
Hyunjin Seo: Experience to show that curricula tailored for learners needs and career aspirations were helpful, it is not only contributes to their positive money outcomes, but also helps to nurture the sense of belonging.
Quincy Brown: And so I wonder what when I when I thought about just now, you know, a limitation due to imagine lack of imagination.
Quincy Brown: Right, and so you said just rethinking about what the the core sequences I putting some of those more.
Quincy Brown: Exploratory courses that allow you to reach into other areas earlier in earlier in the Kirk if you were in the degree plan right, I mean all of those things I think require you know willingness to just reimagine all of it.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: that's right, I think that there's really I think a lot of females coming into the program don't really understand those multiple pathways and they see computer science really just as programming.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: And I think it's really incumbent upon those teaching the introductory courses that you really bring in.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: problems that can look at social impact, and how you can connect it to the Community and really trying to engage the students much more.
Loretta Ovueraye: Well, so seems like informal learning is important starting early is important in the curriculum.
Loretta Ovueraye: So, now that sort of leads to our next question, because if we are talking about exposure and showing students early enough what's happening or what they can be right.
Loretta Ovueraye: What what can we be done by academic organizations or institutions to develop academic programs targeting non traditional learners and or returning students so we've heard the example with the formal learning my doctor, so what else, what else can be done.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Well, I can I can contribute to.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: This because it's something that I think is a real challenge that need to be looking at i'm serving right now with on a day some committee on women of color in tech.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: And I was the group I was focused with was looking at non traditional paths and one of the things that we think is really important, especially in computer science or any technology field.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Is the importance of badging and credentialing a lot of the entry points, especially for minority minority students is through Community colleges and can can institutions of higher ED begin giving some credit to that right who you have expertise or she can show competencies based on.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Value badging or credential program in and that could really be.
Loretta Ovueraye: an entry point I think in terms of not having to.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Not having to retake courses that you may already know and get credit and then also thinking about how do you help those students levels so that they can fast track through the Program.
Hyunjin Seo: I can also add a little bit more, I agree with Dr gates about the importance of credentialing because for our program you know, working with non.
Hyunjin Seo: Traditional students our program our approach, offering certificate has been hugely popular and a good motivator really important motivator for our participants.
Hyunjin Seo: And also, I think that one of the most important things that I think universities in academic institutions.
Hyunjin Seo: Probably should do is to strengthen collaborations with Community partners industry partners, yes, but also Community organizations that work directly with underserved and underrepresented populations.
Hyunjin Seo: There are you know each city has multiple organizations that serve the needs of marginalized populations so by working with them, you are better able to identify.
Hyunjin Seo: The group that you.
Hyunjin Seo: want to inspire but also these organization can help retain them as well and technology, education programs that I run for immigrant women returning from jail or prison and low income.
Hyunjin Seo: Minority older adults equivalent could have not been achieved without you know close collaboration with Community organizations and again they help identify prospective participants and.
Hyunjin Seo: retain them through through the program and also have found it useful to you know use interest based learning approach in I briefly.
Hyunjin Seo: mentioned that earlier but interest is an effective motivator for learning and this framework really designs money activities in learners specific.
Hyunjin Seo: You know around learner specific interest interest and previous research and technology, education in our own experience of offering technology, education to marginalized women.
Hyunjin Seo: suggest properly understanding their learning interests and incorporating them into curriculum is essential to to really attract and retain underserved population underrepresented populations.
Quincy Brown: into the House I think it's also important to realize that there you know we kind of made this binary of traditional and non traditional but.
Quincy Brown: I think that's false right, I mean there are people were coming in, just as Dr so just mentioned, you know from so many different ways right and so there's also not a one size non traditional learner.
Quincy Brown: pathway, and so I think that's one of the things I would suggest that people do is to really take the time to look at specifically who you're targeting because their needs, you know as.
Quincy Brown: may be different right, then other and other groups needs that may be different than another group to needs and so again designing one you know non traditional path.
Quincy Brown: Might not actually be the best for any particular group right trying to be a catch all but to really be you know explicit and clear about who you're targeting and what their specific needs are yeah.
Loretta Ovueraye: sounds like Dr brown you're saying that institutions tend to create these Perrier career pathways for on ramps right but different groups, and we need to be a little bit more open.
Loretta Ovueraye: And then you know the p la or prior learning assessments type of grid open opportunities for other people to jump on, and I think I just stepped on you, Dr games, what else did you want to add.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: No, no, that I think you know what quincy the point she makes is absolutely right, I mean you start labeling and people and that's not the way we should be looking at this and.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: What I was going to add to that was just talking about the importance of bringing asset based thinking into.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: into the department, where you're looking at the assets that the students are bringing when we start talking about women re entering the rescaling or even talking about veterans they bring so much.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Knowledge with them that that we have to figure out ways to acknowledge that and to identify ways.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: To not to allow them to advance more rapidly to the program because of their backgrounds and that's a hard thing to do in academia, but you know.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: We really have those deep discussions around them yeah.
Loretta Ovueraye: it's definitely is a hard thing, and I can tell you from experience on that the more you try to make things in a way that flows, sometimes we end up stepping on each other right yeah.
Loretta Ovueraye: In the process, so this doesn't nicely lead into and forgive that type I just noticed that it says question for our actions on the third question.
Loretta Ovueraye: i'll do the learners returning from career break who are interested in computing fit in with today's world in tomorrow's workforce consisting of many mtech specialists right.
Loretta Ovueraye: So we're we're talking about the challenges of getting people on boarded and these various on ramps that we currently have in academia, but.
Loretta Ovueraye: How do we get our learners to know about these Colonel on ramps and be able to quickly upscale because that's what may be required, depending on the individual to get into the workforce, are there any tips that you have based on your experience.
Quincy Brown: So I can I can take a stab at the first part of that and how do we get them to know, I think.
Quincy Brown: One one way, and one thing that's important is for people to be transparent about their own paths.
Quincy Brown: right there these you know people don't talk about enough about you know what didn't work and how many times they might have tried and when they might have had to stop, and you know and come back and so.
Quincy Brown: It gives the impression that that the way it's done is by you know starting when you're 1718 right and.
Quincy Brown: going to school for for full time for four years graduating four years, I mean very few students actually do that right.
Quincy Brown: But that's not the story, and so I think this conference and other conferences.
Quincy Brown: When people are sharing their stories and you know being very clear and transparent about all of the paths you.
Quincy Brown: I think that's that goes a long way in helping people see themselves and see where they are in this big kind of woman, you know, this is a tangle but this you know woven set of pathways in.
Quincy Brown: Because I just don't think we do that as a discipline enough right.
Hyunjin Seo: yeah I agree with Dr brown's then, and of course there are high demands for technology jobs, and you know because I often work with older adults.
Hyunjin Seo: And, and I realized that many of them may not have had opportunities to be exposed to or systematically learn computing related topics for their formal education.
Hyunjin Seo: i'm talking, you know women in there, you know, sometimes 40s in health program who who get to learn in on the certificates is a free free certificates provided by the sponsored by nsf the project is funded by nsf.
Hyunjin Seo: And, and they they actually either get jobs entry level positions at technology companies, but also some of them want to become a student in computer science so it's absolutely right that there are so many different pathways.
Hyunjin Seo: It was in academia in in industry and how they intersect one another, I think it's also important for us to understand, and so it is really important to.
Hyunjin Seo: identify and develop you know different learning pathways formal and informal learning pathways for those who are interested in entering or re entering the field.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: And we're seeing a lot.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Of nonprofits in this space and so there's a lot of opportunities for a nonprofit to to as entry points and and also another trend, right now, especially with a large high tech companies.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Google, for one, is that they have these programs that are allowing people regardless of your background, I mean it could be in liberal arts or another.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: completely non stem field, providing them entry through through personalized training to get them on board to their organization, and so there, there was that big trend that we really you know.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: From a higher ED point of view, need to be able to look at all of these entry points and be able to think about them.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: One of the things that you did with with Microsoft and I know that C is for all puts a lot of attention on K through 12 teachers and so we started a program.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: To prepare them for certification, but also an entry point into the graduate school, so that they can deepen their knowledge of computer science, the danger being that they may leave.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: K through 12 being a teacher and then moving into to another into.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: To just a technology career, but I think it's so important because of the ubiquity of computer computing that everyone needs to have that depth of understanding yeah.
Quincy Brown: And I guess I started but didn't share myself, so I I started my PhD when I was in my early 30s I had.
Quincy Brown: You know I think one daughter was in preschool and the other one was in kindergarten or first grade something like that, and so I you know I learned a lot about you know balancing and the pathways and having to.
Quincy Brown: fit into this very traditional you know rigid, I would say more rigid than i'd say traditional path, while dealing with you know life as a 30 some odd year old.
Quincy Brown: You know your mother's I saw some of the comments in the chat there and I want to you know applaud all of the people, responding to say that you know, there are a lot of people who've done that.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: But again, it is well I got my nose 45 I got my masters, when I was 40 so yeah it's never too late, I think I saw someone say that.
Loretta Ovueraye: yeah yeah same here I didn't do it as a spring being I did in.
Loretta Ovueraye: My 40s.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: yeah when you raise family and you do other things, and then you say wait a minute I need to do so.
Loretta Ovueraye: I believe you do it when you're ready, yes, I think that in the that's, the most important thing that you start the path and you finish it so you don't want it when you're ready and you get it going.
Quincy Brown: Yes, absolutely.
Loretta Ovueraye: So that leads us to the.
Claudia Del Valle: Definitely, I wanted to say something my name is Claudia.
So.
Loretta Ovueraye: Claudia.
Claudia Del Valle: we're so sorry yes.
Claudia Del Valle: Okay, so he's a non traditional.
Claudia Del Valle: Sorry, can you hear me now yeah.
Loretta Ovueraye: Yes, we hear you now.
Claudia Del Valle: So i'm 44 years old, and last year.
Claudia Del Valle: Okay laughter my daughter my my fourth child graduating from high school and i've always pushed them to go to college try to find a foundation, so the best thing to stand on, and they are all now in college, so I had problem that they all finished.
Loretta Ovueraye: you're not talking all things are weird are you hearing you.
Claudia Del Valle: Such a long, long time.
Claudia Del Valle: I am so sorry go ahead and move forward, because I got it's cutting up because of my Internet okay.
Claudia Del Valle: Great Thank you.
Elodie Billionniere: Claudia if you don't mind, because your Internet is coming up your connection if you can type in the chat, then we can get back to you will will read in, and we can address it at the end if that makes sense.
Claudia Del Valle: Thanks.
Loretta Ovueraye: For jumping in and and all the chat the comments in the chat will address them.
Loretta Ovueraye: But it's very inspirational so from the academics we're looking at the next question it's really what can academia and industry do right to computing, how can we create a more inclusive environment.
Loretta Ovueraye: I think about when I first was working on my environmental science degree, I was the only black female in my class and.
Loretta Ovueraye: It requires a certain stubbornness right for you to get through that experience any what can we do from your experience what can we share to academia, to make life, a little bit more inclusive.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Well, I can I can start.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: One of the things that i've.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: been working on with AAA as is it to AAA is has a framework called sea change that is looking at collecting data at the institutional level around diversity equity inclusion.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: This summer I was part of a committee to look at the disciplinary approach, you know how do we do this in computer science or physics or biology at the departmental level and so it's around really collecting data of department committing to collecting data around.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: faculty opportunities for faculty advance what are your numbers look like, with your students look like, what are the opportunities for professional development of students, the nsf.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: director this morning was talking about all of these great ideas of what has to be present.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: But doing self reflection as a department and really hearing the voices of students, having a departmental student climate survey understanding their own experiences within the classroom really shines a light on what you have to do to have the Ai.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Focus department, where we're really addressing it directly, we did this, we had a grant from nsf from the Red program revolutionising engineering and computer science, education.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: And we started that process of having a student survey climate survey and we found so.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Rather than just presenting the results we had the Faculty discuss the results in small groups and faculty and those that may be tended to not really.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: think it was serious where it was very eye opening for them, they were saying oh my God I didn't know that students.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: didn't feel like their answers were valued and then it became Okay, what are you going to do to change and so.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: We have a survey every other year to look at and track, you know what changes are occurring, but I think you have to.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: You know, goes back what was said, I think, in the keynote, and that is that you know, one of accountability as a department chair faculty yet to be accountable for what is occurring in the department or in your classroom.
Quincy Brown: And I think I think you know it's unfortunate, so the comments in the chat about having you know tough skin you shouldn't have to have tough skin.
Quincy Brown: To get to get a degree in this field in any field right, I mean that's not a requirement for the work.
Quincy Brown: And so I think that you know we there's work to be done around you know, communities and connection to communities, and so you know I also work at a need to be.org and we have you know, we have the sisters community.
Quincy Brown: And that is a valuable resource for for many women to find a sense of support independent of where they are what stage of their career, they are we have local communities, there are also you know the grace hopper celebration, and so there are, I think, being connected to others.
Quincy Brown: You know, from whichever which parts of your identity you, you want to do that.
Quincy Brown: I think, is really important to helping people know they're they're not alone, I mean it's it's it is tough right and tough skin shouldn't be a requirement.
Quincy Brown: And I think having community to lean on a no one gets through these degrees by themselves, even the people who pretend that they do have gotten a lot of help, they may not even sometimes they may not even know it.
Quincy Brown: And I think we also need to make that more transparent and clear.
Loretta Ovueraye: No see we have about eight minutes left for this session, so I don't I do want an opportunity for us to get one or two of the audience members to you know share a thought or or some feedback the doctor, so we wanted to add something and then I would call on one or two of our.
Loretta Ovueraye: fat audience members.
Hyunjin Seo: Every breath if you call it really demonstrated the how the crisis situation like this can disproportionately affect women, especially women with.
Hyunjin Seo: childcare responsibilities, so I think that being creative and FLEX flexible in offering learning opportunities is very important.
Hyunjin Seo: And again, providing flexible learning modules to accommodate varying career goals work schedules and levels of knowledge and experience in the field, as I mentioned earlier certificate programs.
Hyunjin Seo: was our to have women in our in our program women of color women who have childcare responsibilities so by incorporating you know lots of online and different.
Hyunjin Seo: That can accommodate their you know work in life schedules has been really important.
Hyunjin Seo: And also being able to systematically assessing learners interest in Nice in returning to technology as one of the speaker mentioned, there are a lot of nonprofit organizations working in this area, one.
Hyunjin Seo: Probably are the advantage, the academia has in running a program like this is, we can really do systematic and solid research and we do.
Hyunjin Seo: Pre you know mid mid program and post research of control group and intervention group so being able to get our data and assess and incorporate that into the learning modules in developing money models has been really helpful.
Loretta Ovueraye: Thank you for that, because we we this Kobe pandemic has shown that what what we thought was not possible working at home is very possible you just need to have enough incentive and enough flexibility to make it happen yeah very true.
Quincy Brown: And we've done i'm going to need to be we've done a survey we collected data from almost 500 people this summer that that showed that the flexibility is key that's one of our findings right flexibility is key it's important for students and also having faculty who demonstrate empathy.
Quincy Brown: You know I think people respond to that and they see that and so i'm hopeful that you know, one of the things that that stay with us as we you know return to their coats normal is this flexibility and the ability to learn, you know where you are when you need to.
Loretta Ovueraye: Cry maybe.
Loretta Ovueraye: Even the flexibility might just be the empathy and he was always there, but now you can say Okay, I understand that your home with your kids but for work right.
Quincy Brown: But I think it's both right there's this synchronous model that everyone has to be in one place, at one time learning, you know the.
Quincy Brown: same way, all that that's kind of you know, for a lot of cases con out of the window and so that flexibility of being able to turn things in when unique you know when you can you know if people have adapted and all sorts of ways.
Loretta Ovueraye: Yes.
Quincy Brown: Yes, that worked for faculty I mean some of this stuff is hard on faculty right there.
Loretta Ovueraye: Well gee.
Quincy Brown: Students and so.
Quincy Brown: it's good i'm sorry I.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: say more deliberately thinking about engagement, I mean, which is what I think you're all are saying as well, I mean, how do we engage our students and I hope that that carries over you know right.
Loretta Ovueraye: So, Michelle foreman in the chat mentioned that if we reach out to students in underserved neighborhoods and create opportunities for experience in the field that is a certain way to recreate that kind of inclusive environment.
Loretta Ovueraye: Then.
Loretta Ovueraye: lucretia if I if you have your MIC, I just wanted you to speak on where you said and strength is Dr brown mentioned, and we should not be thinking about tough skin right as a criteria for you to survive in an experience, do you want to share to appreciate your comments.
Loretta Ovueraye: Or did we lose the creature already.
Loretta Ovueraye: No she's not here alright so maybe she doesn't want to be put on the spot and that's okay.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Well she's getting on, I would like to say that, unfortunately, you do have to have to ask it, but you have to have you know you have to have with quincy said is right there you have to have these allies and.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: that's something that we started as an ally ship program where junior seniors are working with freshmen sophomores so so that they are checking in with them and helping them navigate.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: You know the what seems very harsh, I mean computer science, unfortunately, has that model, maybe because there's so few women, I mean.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: faculty meetings are really hot everyone's harsh on each other, and we have to change that environment and and make it more rounds support right and creating allies sponsors for one another.
Loretta Ovueraye: very true yeah.
Quincy Brown: That model it doesn't work well for from all but a few people right.
Quincy Brown: And we are harsh.
Quincy Brown: In all the ways, you know.
Loretta Ovueraye: We got and then i'm bit were rekha Nada i'm so sorry if I mispronounced your name.
Loretta Ovueraye: As you were saying, I do not have programming experience I come from business and real estate background tech is a future just jump in and start learning, little by little i'm just getting started in the field myself, so there is some of that jump in and just get it get going right.
Loretta Ovueraye: And that's one of the things that I think i've done just jump in and get going and then ask myself how did I get here.
Loretta Ovueraye: So it is important, so we have two minutes left far session the comments in the chat has been amazing.
Loretta Ovueraye: The discussion I was hoping we could get through all of them and get some other folks is there any burning question from the audience, that we must answer before we leave.
Loretta Ovueraye: I know we had some tech challenges, but please feel free to put that question out let's use our two minute wisely before we wrap up with final words from our panelists.
Maria Pena: So I do have, I do have a question.
Maria Pena: First of all, thank you so much for taking the time to come and speak about some of this questions related to inclusive city and specially women i'm.
Maria Pena: In my 50s right So when I first started i'm an engineer my background is in mechanical engineering and they used to have what is called affirmative action.
Maria Pena: So I would like to know what happened with that what happened with affirmative action that actually allow people like me was a female Hispanic in Spain stam get into corporate jobs, you know.
Maria Pena: What happened to the government and institutions that we have lost the simplicity in in academia and industry.
Maria Pena: In students and when I post a question and then close my go back to me.
Loretta Ovueraye: Thank you, Maria who wants to take that so we could take one person oh.
Loretta Ovueraye: You got it okay.
Quincy Brown: My answer is short, because we're out of time, I mean lawsuits right so those.
Quincy Brown: Those those people sued and you know things changed that's the short honest answer lot more nuance to that, but yet lawsuits.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: I have, I have read that there is a change on how to recast that and I want to applaud nsf for being very bold and creating the includes is one of their top 10 big ideas, even though we focus on process but still that elevated the importance of the.
Loretta Ovueraye: You know, so, in other words it's still exists it's just a different name it's no longer called affirmative action, but there are still opportunities.
Loretta Ovueraye: We need to find allies, we need to find onboarding rank opportunities at various institutions.
Loretta Ovueraye: There are so many ways we can support each other and one of the things that i've read is that sometimes your mentor does not need look like you.
Loretta Ovueraye: Your mentor is someone who will champion your cause and support you so folks keep that at the back of your mind, I want to thank our amazing panelists who have been forthright in their comments today any last words before we all jump up to the next to the break.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: Well, I can say that we're all part of change and so your voices need to be heard, I mean reach out to you can reach out to me and the work that I do and i'm sure everyone else on the call or on the panel today feel the same way, but we need everyone to make change happen.
Loretta Ovueraye: Dr Brown.
Quincy Brown: Now I don't have anything else to add to that I.
Quincy Brown: You know we're all in this together, and together we can we can make a difference, we can make a change.
Loretta Ovueraye: Thank you, Dr so.
Hyunjin Seo: yeah I don't have much to add either, but i'm very excited to you know, see the tet the passion and enthusiasm on this topic, and thank you all for sharing your wonderful ideas, because I learned, as I participating in the panel as well, thank you.
Loretta Ovueraye: Alright, so let's give our panelists a virtual top of our hands, you can use your icon and thank you so much for being here folks enjoy the rest of the Conference, and I look forward to meeting you at another session have a wonderful day.
Elodie Billionniere: Thank you.
Ann Q. Gates, UTEP: appreciate it good job.